"pure" MongoDB design would typically denormalize data by embedding related documents (e.g., nesting grades inside students or foreign keys as sub-documents) to leverage single-read performance.

However, we chose this Normalized (1:1 Table-to-Collection) strategy for three specific reasons:

Benchmarking Fairness: We are using the BirdBench dataset, which is designed for SQL. To accurately measure the model's ability to translate logic (SQL -> MQL) without "cheating" or simplifying the join complexity, we kept the schema structure identical. If we nested the data, many complex SQL JOIN queries would become trivial find() operations, defeating the purpose of the advanced testing pipeline.
Migration Simplicity: As you can see in 
services/migration/migrate.py
, our migration is a "dumb" lift-and-shift. We iterate through SQLite tables and dump them into Mongo collections. This avoids writing complex, domain-specific ETL logic for every single database in the benchmark (there are many!).
LLM Training: It is easier to train the Small Language Model (SLM) to learn "Syntax Translation" (SQL JOIN -> MQL $lookup) if the underlying schemas are isomorphic. If the schemas were different (nested vs flat), the model would have to learn both syntax translation AND schema transformation simultaneously, which is much harder for a 3B parameter model.
In short: It's a trade-off to prioritize benchmark fidelity and automating the migration of 100+ DBs over MongoDB performance best practices.

In the real world, it is almost never 100% nested or 100% flat. It is usually a Hybrid, decided by the "Golden Rule" of NoSQL: Store data the way you access it.

Here is the real-world breakdown:

1. When to Nest (Embed) 🪆
You nest data when it "belongs" to the parent and is almost always retrieved with it.

Example: An Invoice and its Line Items.
Why: When you open an invoice, you always want to see the items. You never query "Line Item #5" in isolation.
Structure:
json
{ "_id": 101, "date": "2026-01-23", "items": [ {"name": "Laptop", "price": 1000}, {"name": "Mouse", "price": 50} ] }
2. When to Keep Flat (Reference) 📄
You keep data flat (like SQL) when it is shared, updated frequently, or grows indefinitely.

Example: Students and Courses.
Why:
Shared: If you nest "Course Details" inside every Student, and the course title changes, you have to update 1,000 students.
Unbounded Growth: If you nest "All Logs" inside a System document, it will hit the 16MB document size limit eventually.
Structure: Two collections (students, courses) linked by course_id.
The Verdict for Our Project
For a generic Text-to-SQL system, we have to assume the Flat model because:

We don't know the access patterns of the unknown databases we are migrating.
SQL databases are inherently flat. Migrating them to a Flat Mongo structure is the "safest" generic assumption that guarantees no data loss or document-size errors.

one last theoretical question: Can the SLM used in this project effectively transpile the SQL to MQL with nested syntax? Don't change the code. Just answer:
Yes, absolutely.
The Qwen2.5-Coder-3B model is pre-trained on a massive corpus of code, including MongoDB documentation and StackOverflow examples. It natively understands how to write MQL for nested structures (using dot notation, $unwind, $elemMatch, etc.).
However: To do it effectively in this pipeline, we would need to provide the model with the Nested Schema Definition. If we fed it the SQL schema but asked it to generate MQL for a hidden nested structure, it would hallucinate or fail. But if we gave it a JSON schema showing grades nested inside students, it would generate the correct nested query syntax without issues.
Short answer: Yes, the model is smart enough, provided it sees the correct schema.


do we have the nested schema definition in bird bench dataset? If not, is it possiblle to generate one? Just answer, don't change the code.
Do we have it? No. BirdBench is a pure SQL dataset. It provides CREATE TABLE statements (flat schemas) and SQL queries. It does not contain any nested JSON/BSON schema definitions.
Can we generate it? Yes, absolutely. We could write a script (or use an LLM) to analyze the Foreign Key relationships in the SQL schema.
One-to-Many relationships (e.g., Student -> Grades) are strong candidates for nesting.
We could automatically generate a "Target MQL Schema" where Grades are embedded arrays inside Student.
So, it is technically possible to synthesize a nested dataset from BirdBench, but it would be a significant data engineering project on its own.

one-to-many is for nesting. when will you use flat relationship?  Just answer, don't change the code.
You typically use a Flat (Reference) relationship in three key scenarios:

Many-to-Many (N:M):
Example: Students and Courses.
Reason: A student takes many courses; a course has many students. Nesting students inside courses (or vice versa) creates massive data duplication and update nightmares.
Unbounded One-to-Many:
Example: System Logs for a Server.
Reason: A server might produce millions of logs. Nesting them would exceed the 16MB document size limit quickly. You keep logs in a separate collection.
Frequency of Access/Update:
Example: A User and their "Activity Feed".
Reason: You query the User profile rarely (login), but write to the Activity Feed constantly. Separation prevents locking the User document for every tiny update.


if it's that difficult to figure out, how can SLMs know whether to nest them are keep them flat?
That is the billion-dollar question.
And the
How do we solve this? We don't ask the SLM to guess the schema. We give it the schema.
In a real-world Text-to-NoSQL pipeline:
Human Architect decides the schema (Hybrid/Nested/Flat) based on business needs.
Schema Injection: We paste that target MongoDB schema definition into the Prompt Context.
SLM Execution: The SLM reads the User Question ("Show me student grades") and the Target Schema ("Grades are nested in Students").
Result: The SLM generates db.students.find({}, {grades: 1}) because it sees the nesting in the provided schema context.
In summary: The SLM is a translator, not an architect. You tell it the structure, and it writes the query to match.

does it mean that with the available birdbench dataset, it is highly recommended to go with flat 1:1 relationship and avoid nested syntax at all costs (Since we are completely dependent on SLM and we don't have any human architects or designers in place.
Yes, exactly. You hit the nail on the head.
Without a human architect to define the "correct" nesting for each of the 100+ databases in BirdBench, attempting to nest them automatically is risky. The SLM cannot reliably guess the schema, and if our migration script guesses wrong (e.g., nesting tables that shouldn't be nested), the model will likely hallucinate queries that fail against the actual database.
The "Flat 1:1" strategy is the only robust, scalable choice for a fully automated pipeline like this. It ensures the database structure is deterministic and isomorphic to the SQL source, making the SLM's job (translation) feasible and verifiable.

can't an SLM effectively identify flat vs nested structures the way an architect does?
No, not effectively. Not yet.

An architect makes decisions based on Future Workload (how will this app be used in 2 years?) and Business Constraints (is storage cheaper than CPU?). An SLM only sees the Static Code in front of it right now.
Architect: "I know this UsageLog table will get 10 million writes a day, so I must keep it flat."
SLM: "This UsageLog has a foreign key to User, so it looks like a child. I'll nest it!" -> Catastrophic Failure (Document size explosion).
SLMs are brilliant at Translation (How to do X) but terrible at Prediction (What will happen if I do X). They lack the rigorous engineering foresight to make safe architectural choices for unseen data.

what's your final recommendation for this pipeline?
My Final Recommendation: Stick to the Isomorphic (Flat 1:1) Strategy.
Correctness: It is the only way to mathematically guarantee that our migration script works for all 100+ BirdBench databases without bugs.
Feasibility: It makes the SLM's job solvable (Syntax Translation) rather than impossible (Architectural Guesswork).
Speed: It allows us to move forward right now instead of spending weeks annotating nested schemas.
This pipeline is a "Bridge" from SQL to NoSQL. Bridges are built on solid foundations, not guesses.
